<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI: A Question</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">A Question</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>“Think on thy sins.”</p>
					<cite>Othello</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The next morning when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester came down to breakfast, he found on the library-table an exquisite casket, similar to the one he had given Paula the night before, but larger, and filled with flowers of the most delicious odor.</p>
			<p>“For Miss Fairchild,” explained Samuel, who was at that moment passing through the room.</p>
			<p>With a pang of jealous surprise, that, however, failed to betray itself in his steadily composed countenance, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester advanced to the side of the table, and lifted up the card that hung attached to the beautiful present. The name he read there seemed to startle him; he moved away, and took up his paper with a dark flush on his brow, that had not disappeared when Miss Belinda entered the room.</p>
			<p>“Humph!” was her immediate exclamation, as her eye rested upon the conspicuous offering in the centre of the apartment. But instantly remembering herself, advanced with a cheerful good morning, which however did not prevent her eyes from wandering with no small satisfaction towards this fresh evidence of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ensign’s assiduous regard.</p>
			<p>“Paula is remembered by others than ourselves,” remarked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester, probably observing her glance.</p>
			<p>“Yes; she has a very attentive suitor in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ensign,” returned Miss Belinda shortly. “A pleasant appearing young man,” she ejaculated next moment; “worthy in many respects of success, I should say.”</p>
			<p>“Has he⁠—do you mean to say that he has visited you in Grotewell?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester, his eye upon the paper in his hand.</p>
			<p>“Certainly; a few more interviews will settle it.”</p>
			<p>The paper rustled in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester’s grasp, but his voice was composed if not formal, as he observed, “She regards his attentions then with favor?”</p>
			<p>“She wears his flowers in her bosom, and brightens like a flower herself when he is seen to approach. If allowed to go her way unhindered, I have but little doubt as to how it will end. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ensign is not handsome, but I am told that he has every other qualification likely to make a gentle creature like Paula happy.”</p>
			<p>“He is a good fellow,” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester under his breath.</p>
			<p>“And goodness is the first essential in the character of the man who is to marry Paula,” inexorably observed Miss Belinda. “An open, cheerful disposition, a clear conscience and a past with no dark pages in its history, must mark him who is to link unto his fate our pure and sensitive Paula. Is it not so, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester?”</p>
			<p>The advertisements in that morning’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Tribune</i> must have been unusually interesting, judging from the difficulty which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester experienced in withdrawing his eyes from them. “The man whom Paula marries,” said he at last, “can neither be too good, too kind, or too pure. Nor shall any other than a good, kind, and pure man possess her,” he added in a tone that while low, effectually hushed even the slow-to-be-intimidated Miss Belinda. In another moment Paula entered.</p>
			<p>Oh, the morning freshness of some faces! Like the singing of birds in a prison, is the sound and sight of a lovely maiden coming into the grim, gray atmosphere of a winter breakfast room. Paula was exceptionally gifted with this auroral cheer which starts the day so brightly. At sight of her face <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester dropped his paper, and even Miss Belinda straightened herself more energetically. “Merry Christmas,” cried her sweet young voice, and immediately the whole day seemed to grow glad with promise and gaysome with ringing sleigh-bells. “It’s snowing, did you know it? A world of life is in the air; the flakes dance as they come down, like dervishes in a frenzy. It was all we lacked to make the day complete; now we have everything.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Miss Belinda, with a significant glance at the table, “everything.”</p>
			<p>Paula followed her glance, saw the silver box with its wealth of blossoms, and faltered back with a quick look at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester’s grave and watchful countenance.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ensign seems to be possessed of clairvoyance,” observed Miss Belinda easily. “How he could know that you were to be in town today, I cannot imagine.”</p>
			<p>“I wrote him in my last letter that in all probability I should spend the holidays with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester,” explained Paula simply, but with a slow and deepening flush, that left the roses she contemplated nothing of which to boast. “I did so, because he proposed to visit Grotewell on Christmas.”</p>
			<p>There was a short silence in the room, then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester rose, and remarking with polite composure, “It is a very pretty remembrance,” led the way into the dining-room. Paula with a slow drooping of her head quickly followed, while Miss Belinda brought up the rear, with the look of a successful diplomat.</p>
			<p>A meal in the Sylvester mansion was always a formal affair, but this was more than formal. A vague oppression seemed to fill the air; an oppression which Miss Belinda’s stirring conversation found it impossible to dissipate. In compliance to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester’s request, she sat at the head of the table, and was the only one who seemed able to eat anything. For one thing she had never seen Ona in that post of honor, but Paula and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester could not forget the graceful form that once occupied that seat. The first meal above a grave, no matter how long it has been dug, must ever seem weighted with more or less unreality.</p>
			<p>Besides, with Paula there was a vague unsettled feeling, as if some delicate inner balance had been too rudely shaken. She longed to fly away and think, and she was obliged to sit still and talk.</p>
			<p>The end of the meal was a relief to all parties. Miss Belinda went upstairs, thoughtfully shaking her firm head; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester sat down again to his paper, and Paula advanced towards the dainty gift that awaited her inspection on the library table. But halfway to it she paused. A strange shyness had seized her. With <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester sitting there, she dared not approach this delicate testimonial of another’s affection. She did not know as she wished to. Her eyes stole in hesitation to the floor. Suddenly <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester spoke:</p>
			<p>“Why do you not look at your pretty present, Paula?”</p>
			<p>She started, gave him a quick glance, and advanced hurriedly towards the table; but scarcely had she reached it when she paused, turned and hastened over to his side. He was still reading, or appearing to read, but she saw his hand tremble where it grasped the sheet, though his face with its clear cut profile, shone calm and cold against the dark background of the wall beyond.</p>
			<p>“I do not care to look at it now,” said she, with a hurried interlacing of her restless fingers.</p>
			<p>He turned towards her and a quick thrill passed over his countenance. “Sit down, Paula,” said he, “I want to talk to you.”</p>
			<p>She obeyed as might an automaton. Was it the tone of his voice that chilled her, or the studied aspect of his fixed and solemn countenance? He did not speak at once, but when he did, there was no faltering in his voice, that was lower than common, but deep, like still waters that have run into dark channels far from the light of day.</p>
			<p>“Paula, I want to ask you a question. What would you think of a man that, with deliberate selfishness, went into the king’s garden, and plucking up by the roots the most beautiful flower he could find there, carried it into a dungeon to pant out its exquisite life amid chill and darkness?”</p>
			<p>“I should think,” replied she, after the first startled moment of silence, “that the man did well, if by its one breath of sweetness, the flower could comfort the heart of him who sat in the dungeon.”</p>
			<p>The glance with which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester regarded her, suddenly faltered; he turned with quickness towards the fire. “A moment’s joy is, then, excuse for a murder,” exclaimed he. “God and the angels would not agree with you, Paula.”</p>
			<p>There was a quivering in his tone, made all the more apparent by its studied self-possession of a moment before. She trembled where she sat, and opened her lips to speak, but closed them again, awed by his steady and abstracted gaze, now fixed before him in gloomy reverie. A moment passed. The clock ticking away on the mantelpiece seemed to echo the inevitable “Forever! never!” of Longfellow’s old song. Neither of them moved. At length, in a low and trembling voice, Paula spoke:</p>
			<p>“Is it murder, when the flower loves the dark of the dungeon more than it does the light of day?”</p>
			<p>With a subdued but passionate cry he rose hastily to his feet. “Yes,” said he, and drew back as if he could not bear the sight of her face or the glance of her eye. “Sunshine is the breath of flowers; sweet wooing gales, their natural atmosphere. He who meddles with a treasure so choice does it at his peril.” Then as she hurriedly rose in turn, softened his whole tone, and assuming his usual air of kindly fatherhood, asked her in the most natural way in the world, what he could do to make her happy that day.</p>
			<p>“Nothing,” replied she, with a droop of her head; “I think I will go and see Cicely.”</p>
			<p>A short sigh escaped him. “The carriage shall be ready for you,” said he. “I hope your friend’s happiness will overflow into your own gentle bosom, and make the day a very pleasant one. God bless your young sweet heart, my Paula!”</p>
			<p>Her breast heaved, her large, dark, mellow eyes flashed with one quick glance towards his face, then she drew back, and in another moment left his side and quietly glided from the room. His very life seemed to go with her, yet he did not stir; but he sighed deeply when, upon turning towards the library-table, he found that she had carried away with her the silent testimonial of another and more fortunate man’s love and devotion.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
