<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIV: A Day at the Bank</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">A Day at the Bank</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rough-hew them how we will.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite>
						<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hamlet</i>
					</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>There are days when the whole world seems to smile upon one without stint or reservation. Bertram Sylvester wending his way to the bank on the morning following the reception, was a cheerful sight to behold. Youth, health, hope spake in every lineament of his face and brightened every glance of his wide-awake eye. His new life was pleasant to him. Bach, Beethoven and Chopin were scarcely regretted now by the ambitious assistant cashier of the Madison Bank, with a friend in each of its directors and a something more than that in the popular president himself. Besides he had developed a talent for the business and was in the confidence of the cashier, a somewhat sickly man who more than once had found himself compelled to rely upon the rapidly maturing judgment of his young associate, in matters oftentimes of the utmost importance. The manner in which Bertram found himself able to respond to these various calls, convinced him that he had been correct in his opinion of his own nature, when he informed his uncle that music was his pleasure rather than his necessity.</p>
			<p>Entering the building by way of Pearl Street, he was about to open the door leading into the bank proper, when he heard a little piping voice at his side, and turning, confronted the janitor’s baby daughter. She was a sweet and interesting child, and with his usual good nature Bertram at once stopped to give her a kiss.</p>
			<p>“I likes you,” prattled she as he put her down again after lifting her up high over his head, “but I likes de oder one best.”</p>
			<p>“I hope the other one duly appreciates your preference,” laughed he, and was again on the point of entering the bank when he felt or thought he felt a hand laid on his arm. It was the janitor himself this time, a worthy man, greatly trusted in the bank, but possessed of such an extraordinary peculiarity in the way of a pair of protruding eyes, that his appearance was always attended by a shock.</p>
			<p>“Well, Hopgood, what is it?” cried Bertram, in his cheery tone.</p>
			<p>The janitor drew back and mercifully shifted his gaze from the young man’s face. “Nothing sir; did I stop you? Beg pardon,” he continued, half stammering, “I’m dreadful awkward sometimes.” And with a nod he sidled off towards his little one whom he confusedly took up in his arms.</p>
			<p>Now Bertram was sure the man had touched him and that, too, with a very eager hand, but being late that morning and consequently in somewhat of a hurry, he did not stop to pursue the matter. Hastening into the Bank, he assisted the teller in opening the safe, that being his especial duty, and was taking out such papers as he himself required, when he was surprised to catch another sight of those same extraordinary organs of which I have just spoken, peering upon him from the door by which he had previously entered. They vanished as soon as he encountered them, but more than once during the morning he perceived them looking upon him from various quarters of the bank, till he felt himself growing seriously annoyed, and sending for the man, asked him what he meant by this unusual surveillance. The janitor seemed troubled, flushed painfully and fixed his eyes in manifest anxiety on the cashier who, engaged in some search of his own, was just handling over the tin boxes that lined the vault before them. Not till he had seen him shove them back into their place and leave the spot, did he venture upon his reply. “I’m sure, sir, I’m very sorry if I have annoyed you, but do you think <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester will be down at the usual hour?”</p>
			<p>“I know of no reason why he should not,” returned Bertram.</p>
			<p>“I have something to say to him when he comes in,” stammered the man, evidently taken aback by Bertram’s look of surprise. “Will you be kind enough to ring the bell the first moment he seems to be at leisure? I don’t know as it is a matter of any importance but⁠—” He stopped, evidently putting a curb upon himself. “Can I rely on you, sir?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, certainly, I will tell my uncle when he comes in that you want to speak to him. He will doubtless send for you at once.”</p>
			<p>The man looked embarrassed. “Excuse me, sir, but that’s just what I’d rather you wouldn’t do. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester is always very busy and he might think I wished to annoy him about some matters of my own, sir, as indeed I have not been above doing at odd times. If you would ring when he comes in, that is all I ask.”</p>
			<p>Bertram thought this a strange request, but seeing the man so anxious, gave the required promise, and the janitor hurried off. “Curious!” muttered Bertram. “Can anything be wrong?” And he glanced about him with some curiosity as he went to his desk. But everyone was at his post as usual and the countenances of all were equally undisturbed.</p>
			<p>It was a busy morning and in the rush of various matters Bertram forgot the entire occurrence. But it was presently recalled to him by hearing someone remark, “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester is late today,” and looking up from some papers he was considering, he found it was a full hour after the time at which his uncle was in the habit of appearing. Just then he caught still another sight of the protruding eyes of Hopgood staring in upon him from the half-opened door at the end of the bank.</p>
			<p>“The fellow’s getting impatient,” thought he, and experienced a vague feeling of uneasiness.</p>
			<p>Another half hour passed. “What can have detained <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester?” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wheelock the cashier, hastily approaching Bertram.</p>
			<p>“There is to be an important meeting of the Directors today, and some of the gentlemen are already coming in. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester is not accustomed to keep us waiting.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know, I am sure,” returned Bertram, remembering with an accession of uneasiness, the abruptness with which his uncle had left the entertainment the evening before.</p>
			<p>“Shall I telegraph to the house?”</p>
			<p>“No, that is not necessary. Besides Folger says he passed him on Broadway this morning.”</p>
			<p>“Going down street with a valise in his hand,” that gentlemen quietly put in. Folger was the teller. “He was looking very pale and didn’t see me when I nodded.”</p>
			<p>“What time was that?” asked Bertram.</p>
			<p>“About twelve; when I went out to lunch.”</p>
			<p>A quick gasp sounded at their side, followed by a hurried cough. Turning, Bertram encountered for the fifth time the eyes of Hopgood. He had entered unperceived by the small door that separated the inner enclosure from the outer, and was now standing very close to them, eying with sidelong looks the safe at their back, the faces of the gentleman speaking, yes, and even the countenances of the clerks, as they bent busily over their books.</p>
			<p>“Did you ring, sir?” asked he, catching Bertram’s look of displeasure.</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>The man seemed to feel the rebuke implied in this short response, and ambled softly away. But in another moment he was stopped by Bertram.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter with you today, Hopgood? Can you have anything of real importance on your mind; anything connected with my uncle?”</p>
			<p>The janitor started, and looked almost frightened. “Be careful what you say,” whispered he; then with a keen look at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wheelock just then on the point of entering the directors’ room, he was turning to escape by the little door just mentioned, when it opened and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant came in. With a look almost of terror the janitor recoiled, throwing himself as it were between the latter and the door of the safe; but recovering himself, surveyed the keen quiet visage of the veteran banker with a rolling of his great eyes absolutely painful to behold. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant, who was somewhat absorbed in thought, did not appear to notice the agitation he had caused, and with just a hurried nod followed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wheelock into the Directors’ room. Instantly the janitor drew himself up with an air of relief, and shortly glancing at the clock which lacked a few minutes yet of the time fixed for the meeting, slided hastily away from Bertram’s detaining hand, and disappeared in the crowd without. In another moment Bertram saw him standing at the outer door, looking anxiously up and down the street.</p>
			<p>“Something <em>is</em> wrong,” murmured Bertram. “What?” And for a moment he felt half tempted to return <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant’s friendly bow with a few words expressive of his uneasiness, but the emphasis with which Hopgood had murmured the words, “Be careful what you say,” unconsciously deterred him, and concealing his nervousness as best he might, he entered the Directors’ office.</p>
			<p>It was now time for the meeting to open, and the gentlemen were all seated around the low green baize table that occupied the centre of the room. Impatience was written on all their countenances. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant especially was looking at the heavy gold watch in his hand, with a frown on his deeply wrinkled brow that did not add to its expression of benevolence. The empty seat at the head of the table stared upon Bertram uncompromisingly.</p>
			<p>“My wife gives a reception today,” ventured one gentleman to his neighbor.</p>
			<p>“And I have an engagement at five that won’t bear postponement.”</p>
			<p>“Sylvester has always been on hand before.”</p>
			<p>“We can’t proceed without him,” was the reply.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wheelock looked thoughtful.</p>
			<p>With a nod of his head towards such gentlemen as met his eye, Bertram hastened to a little cupboard devoted to the use of himself and uncle. Opening it, he looked within, took down a coat he saw hanging before him, and unconsciously uttered an exclamation. It was a dress-coat such as had been worn by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester the evening before.</p>
			<p>“What does this mean! My uncle has been here!” were the words that sprang to his lips; but he subdued his impulse to speak, and hastily hanging up the coat, relocked the door. Proceeding at once to the outer room, he asked two or three of the clerks if they were sure <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester had not been in during the day. But they all returned an unequivocal “no,” and that too with a certain stare of surprise that at once convinced him he was betraying his agitation too plainly.</p>
			<p>“I will telegraph whether Wheelock considers it necessary or not,” thought he, and was moving to summon a messenger boy when he caught sight of Hopgood slowly making his way in from the street. He was very pale and walked with his eyes fixed on the ground, ominously shaking his great head in a way that bespoke an inner struggle of no ordinary nature. Bertram at once sauntered out to meet him.</p>
			<p>“Hopgood,” said he, “your evident anxiety is infectious. What has happened to make my uncle’s detention a matter of such apparent import? If you do not wish to confide in me, his nephew almost his son, speak to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wheelock or to one of the directors, but don’t keep anything to yourself which concerns his welfare or⁠—What are you looking at?”</p>
			<p>The man was gazing as if fascinated at the keys in Bertram’s hand.</p>
			<p>“Nothing sir, nothing. You must not detain me; I have nothing to say. I will wait ten minutes,” he muttered to himself, glancing again at the clock. Suddenly he saw the various directors come filing out of the inner room, and darted for the second time from Bertram’s detaining hand.</p>
			<p>“I hope nothing has happened to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester,” exclaimed one gentleman to another as they filed by.</p>
			<p>“If he were given to a loose ends’ sort of business it would be another thing.”</p>
			<p>“He looked exceedingly well at the reception last night,” exclaimed another; “but in these days⁠—”</p>
			<p>Suddenly there was a hush. A telegraph boy had just entered the door and was asking for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bertram Sylvester.</p>
			<p>“Here I am,” said Bertram, hastily taking the envelope presented him. Slightly turning his back, he opened it. Instantly his face grew white as chalk.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen,” said he, “you will have to excuse my uncle today; a great misfortune has occurred to him.” Then with a slow and horror-stricken movement, he looked about him and exclaimed, “<em><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sylvester is dead</em>.”</p>
			<p>A confused murmur at once arose, followed by a hurried rush; but of all the faces that flocked out of the bank, none wore such a look of blank and helpless astonishment as that of Hopgood the janitor, as with bulging eyes and nervously working hands, he slowly wended his way to the foot of the stairs and there sat down gazing into vacancy.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
