<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVII: The Opinion of a Certain Noted Detective</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Opinion of a Certain Noted Detective</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span class="i12">“But still there clung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One hope, like a keen sword on starting threads uphung.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite>
						<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Revolt of Islam</i>
					</cite>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>“Facts are stubborn things.”</p>
					<cite>Elliott</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Meanwhile <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant hasted on his way downtown and ere long made his appearance at the bank. He found <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester and Bertram seated in the directors’ room, with a portly smooth-faced man whose appearance was at once strange and vaguely familiar.</p>
			<p>“A detective, sir,” explained <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester rising with forced composure; “a man upon whose judgment I have been told we may rely. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant.”</p>
			<p>The latter gentleman nodded, cast a glance around the room, during which his eye rested for a moment on Bertram’s somewhat pale countenance, and nervously took a seat.</p>
			<p>“A mysterious piece of business, this,” came from the detective’s lips in an easy tone, calculated to relieve the tension of embarrassment into which the entrance of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant seemed to have thrown all parties. “What were the numbers of the bonds found missing, if you please?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant told him.</p>
			<p>“You are positively assured these bonds were all in the box when you last locked it?”</p>
			<p>“I am.”</p>
			<p>“When was that, sir? On what day and at what hour of the day, if you please?”</p>
			<p>“Tuesday, at about three o’clock, I should say.”</p>
			<p>“The box was locked by you? There is no doubt about that fact?”</p>
			<p>“None in the least.”</p>
			<p>“Where were you standing at the time?”</p>
			<p>“In front of the vault door. I had taken out the box myself as I am in the habit of doing, and had stepped there to put it back.”</p>
			<p>“Was anyone near you then?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. The cashier was at his desk and the teller had occasion to go to the safe while I stood there. I do not remember seeing anyone else in my immediate vicinity.”</p>
			<p>“Do you remember ever going to the vaults and not finding someone near you at the time or at least in full view of your movements?”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“I have informed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce,” interposed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester, with a ring in his deep voice that made <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant start, “that our chief desire at present is to have his judgment upon the all important question, as to whether this theft was committed by a stranger, or one in the employ and consequently in the confidence of the bank.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant bowed, every wrinkle in his face manifesting itself with startling distinctness as he slowly moved his eyes and fixed them on the inscrutable countenance of the detective.</p>
			<p>“You agree then with these gentlemen,” continued the latter, who had a way of seeming more interested in everything and everybody present than the person he was addressing, “that it would be difficult if not impossible for anyone unconnected with the bank, to approach the vaults during business hours and abstract anything from them without detection?”</p>
			<p>“And do these gentleman both assert that?” queried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant, with a sharp look from uncle to nephew.</p>
			<p>“I believe they do,” replied the detective, as both the gentlemen bowed, Bertram with an uncontrollable quiver of his lip, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester with a deepening of the lines about his mouth, which may or may not have been noticed by this man who appeared to observe nothing.</p>
			<p>“I should be loth to conclude that the robbery was committed by anyone but a stranger,” remarked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant; “but if these gentlemen concur in the statement you have just made, I am bound to acknowledge that I do not myself see how the theft could have been perpetrated by an outsider. Had the box itself been missing, it would be different. I remember my old friend <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> A⁠—, the president of the police department, telling me of a case where a box containing securities to the amount of two hundred thousand dollars, was abstracted in full daylight from the vaults of one of our largest banks; an act requiring such daring, the directors for a long time refused to believe it possible, until a detective one day showed them another box of theirs which he had succeeded in abstracting in the same way.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> But the vaults in that instance were in a less conspicuous portion of the bank than ours, besides to approach an open vault, snatch a box from it and escape, is a much simpler matter than to remain long enough to open a box and choose from its contents such papers as appeared most marketable. If a regular thief could do such a thing, it does not seem probable that he would. Nevertheless the most acute judgment is often at fault in these matters, and I do not pretend to have formed an opinion.”</p>
			<p>The detective who had listened to these words with marked attention, bowed his concurrence and asked if the bonds mentioned by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant were all that had been found missing from the bank. If any of the other boxes had been opened, or if the contents of the safe itself had ever been tampered with.</p>
			<p>“The contents of the safe are all correct,” came in deep tones from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Folger, my nephew and myself went through them this morning. As for the boxes I cannot say, many of them belong to persons travelling; some of them have been left here by trustees of estates, consequently often lie for weeks in the vaults untouched. If however any of them have been opened, we ought to be able to see it. Would you like an examination made of their condition?”</p>
			<p>The detective nodded.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester at once turned to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant. “May I ask you to mention what officer of the bank you would like to have go to the vaults?”</p>
			<p>That gentleman started, looked uneasily about, but meeting Bertram’s eye, nervously dropped his own and muttered the name of Folger.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester suppressed a sigh, sent for the paying-teller, and informed him of their wishes. He at once proceeded to the vaults. While he was gone, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce took the opportunity to make the following remark.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen,” said he, “let us understand ourselves. What you want of me, is to tell you whether this robbery has been committed by a stranger or by someone in your employ. Now to decide this question it is necessary for me to ask first, whether you have ever had reason to doubt the honesty of any person connected with the bank?”</p>
			<p>“No,” came from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester with sharp and shrill distinctness. “Since I have had the honor of conducting the affairs of this institution, I have made it my business to observe and note the bearing and character of each and every man employed under me, and I believe them all to be honest.”</p>
			<p>The glance of the detective while it did not perceptibly move from the large screen drawn across the room at the back of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester, seemed to request the opinions of the other two gentlemen on this point.</p>
			<p>Bertram observing it, subdued the rapid beatings of his heart and spoke with like distinctness. “I have been in the bank the same length of time as my uncle,” said he, “and most heartily endorse his good opinion of the various persons in our employ.”</p>
			<p>“And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant?” the immovable glance seemed to say.</p>
			<p>“Men are honest in my opinion till they are proved otherwise,” came in short stern accents from the director’s lips.</p>
			<p>The detective drew back in his chair as if he considered that point decided, and yet Bertram’s eye which had clouded at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant’s too abrupt assertion, did not clear again as might have been expected.</p>
			<p>“There is one more question I desire to settle,” continued the detective, “and that is, whether this robbery could have been perpetrated after business hours, by someone in collusion with the person who is here left in charge?”</p>
			<p>“No;” again came from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester, with impartial justice. “The watchman⁠—who by the way has been in the bank for twelve years⁠—could not help a man to find entrance to the vaults. His simple duty is to watch over the bank and give alarm in case of fire or burglary. It would necessitate a knowledge of the combination by which the vault doors are opened, to do what you suggest, and that is possessed by but three persons in the bank.”</p>
			<p>“And those are?”</p>
			<p>“The cashier, the janitor, and myself.”</p>
			<p>He endeavored to speak calmly and without any betrayal of the effort it caused him to utter those simple words, but a detective’s ear is nice and it is doubtful if he perfectly succeeded.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce however limited himself to a muttered, humph! and a long and thoughtful look at a spot on the green baize of the table before which he sat.</p>
			<p>“The janitor lives in the building, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and is, as I am sure <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant will second me in asserting, honesty to the backbone.”</p>
			<p>“Janitors always are,” observed the detective; then shortly, “How long has <em>he</em> been with you?”</p>
			<p>“Three years.”</p>
			<p>Another “humph!” and an increased interest in the ink spot.</p>
			<p>“That is not long, considering the responsibility of his position.”</p>
			<p>“He was on the police force before he came to us,” remarked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce looked as if that was not much of a recommendation.</p>
			<p>“As for the short time he has been with us,” resumed the other, “he came into the bank the same winter as my nephew and myself, and has found the time sufficient to earn the respect of all who know him.”</p>
			<p>The detective bowed, seemingly awed by the dignity with which the last statement had been uttered; but anyone who knew him well, would have perceived that the film of uncertainty which had hitherto dimmed the brightness of his regard was gone, as if in the other’s impressive manner, if not in the suggestion his words had unconsciously offered, the detective had received an answer to some question which had been puzzling him, or laid his hand upon some clue which had till now eluded his grasp. The inquiries which he made haste to pursue, betrayed, however, but little of the tendency of his thoughts.</p>
			<p>“The janitor, you say, knows the combination by which the vault doors are opened?”</p>
			<p>“The <em>vault doors</em>,” emphasized <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester. “The safe is another matter; that stands inside the vault and is locked by a triple combination which as a whole is not known to any one man in this building, not even to myself.”</p>
			<p>“But the boxes are not kept in the safe?”</p>
			<p>“No, they are piled up with the books in the vaults at the side of the safe, as you can see for yourself, if you choose to join <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Folger.”</p>
			<p>“Not necessary. The janitor, then, is the only man besides yourselves, who under any circumstances or for any reason, could get at those boxes after business hours?”</p>
			<p>“He is.”</p>
			<p>“One question more. Who is the man to attend to those boxes? I mean to ask, which of the men in your employ is expected to procure a box out of the vaults when it is called for, and put it back in its place when its owner is through with it?”</p>
			<p>“Hopgood usually does that business, the janitor of whom we have just been speaking. When he is upstairs or out of the way, anyone else whom it may be convenient to call.”</p>
			<p>“The janitor, then, has free access to the boxes at all times, night and day?”</p>
			<p>“In one sense, yes, in another, no. Should he unlock the vaults at night, the watchman would report upon his proceedings.”</p>
			<p>“But there must be time between the closing and opening of the bank, when the janitor is alone with the vaults?”</p>
			<p>“There is a space of two hours after seven in the morning, when he is likely to be the sole one in charge. The watchman goes home, and Hopgood employs himself in sweeping out the bank and preparing it for the business of the day.”</p>
			<p>“Are the watchman and the janitor on good terms with one another?”</p>
			<p>“Very, I believe.”</p>
			<p>The detective looked thoughtful. “I should like to see this Hopgood,” said he.</p>
			<p>But just then the door opened and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Folger came in, looking somewhat pale and disturbed. “We are in a difficulty,” cried he, stepping up to the table where they sat. “I have found two of the boxes unlocked; that belonging to Hicks, Saltzer and <abbr>Co.</abbr>, and another with the name of Harrington upon it. The former has been wrenched apart, the latter opened with some sort of instrument. Would you like to see them, sir?” This to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester.</p>
			<p>With a start that gentleman rose, and as suddenly reseated himself. “Yes,” returned he, carefully avoiding his nephew’s eye; “bring them in.”</p>
			<p>“Hicks, Saltzer and <abbr>Co.</abbr>, is a foreign house,” remarked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant to the detective, “and do not send for their box once a fortnight, as I have heard <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester declare. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harrington is on an exploring expedition and is at present in South America.” Then in lower tones, whose sternness was not unmixed with gloom, “The thief seems to have known what boxes to go to.”</p>
			<p>Bertram flushed and made some passing rejoinder; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester and the detective alone remained silent.</p>
			<p>The boxes being brought in, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce opened them without ceremony. Several papers met his eye in both, but as no one but the owners could know their rightful contents, it was of course impossible for him to determine whether anything had been stolen from them or not.</p>
			<p>“Send for the New York agent of Hicks, Saltzer and <abbr>Co.</abbr>,” came from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester, in short, businesslike command.</p>
			<p>Bertram at once rose. “I will see to it,” said he. His agitation was too great for suppression, the expression of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant’s eye, that in its restlessness wandered in every direction but his own, troubled him beyond endurance. With a hasty move he left the room. The cold eye of the detective followed him.</p>
			<p>“Looks bad,” came in laconic tones from the paying teller.</p>
			<p>“I had hoped the affair begun and ended with my individual loss,” muttered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant under his breath.</p>
			<p>The stately president and the inscrutable detective still maintained their silence.</p>
			<p>Suddenly the latter moved. Turning towards <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester, he requested him to step with him to the window. “I want to have a look at your several employees,” whispered he, as they thus withdrew. “I want to see them without being seen by them. If you can manage to have them come in here one by one upon some pretext or other, I can so arrange that screen under the mantelpiece, that it shall not only hide me, but give me a very good view of their faces in the mirror overhead.”</p>
			<p>“There will be no difficulty about summoning the men,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester.</p>
			<p>“And you consent to the scheme?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly, if you think anything is to be gained by it.”</p>
			<p>“I am sure that nothing will be lost. And sir, let the cashier be present if you please; and sir,” squeezing his watch chain with a complacent air, as the other dropped his eyes, “talk to them about anything that you please, only let it be of a nature that will necessitate a sentence or more in reply. I judge a man as much by his voice as his expression.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester bowed, and without losing his self-command, though the short allusion to Bertram had greatly startled him, turned back to the table where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Folger was still standing in conversation with the director.</p>
			<p>“I will not detain you longer,” said he to the paying teller. “Your discretion will prevent you from speaking of this matter, I trust.” Then as the other bowed, added carelessly, “I have something to say to Jessup; will you see that he steps here for a moment?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Folger again nodded and left the room. Instantly <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce bustled forward, and pulling the screen into the position he thought best calculated to answer his requirements, slid rapidly behind it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant looked up in surprise.</p>
			<p>“I am going to interview the clerks for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce’s benefit,” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester. “Will you in the meantime look over the morning paper?”</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” returned the other, edging nervously to one side, “my notebook will do just as well,” and sitting down at the remote end of the table, he took out a book from his pocket, above which he bent with very well simulated preoccupation. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester called in Bertram and then seated himself with a hopeless and unexpectant look, which he for the moment forgot would be reflected in the mirror before him, and so carried to the eye of the watchful detective. In another instant Jessup entered.</p>
			<p>What was said in the short interview that followed, is unimportant. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jessup, the third teller, was one of those clear eyed, straightforward appearing men whose countenance is its own guarantee. It was not necessary to detain him or make him speak. The next man to come in was Watson, and after he had gone, two or three of the clerks, and later the receiving teller and one of the runners. All stopped long enough to insure <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce a good view of their faces, and from each and all did <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester succeed in eliciting more or less conversation in response to the questions he chose to put.</p>
			<p>With the disappearance of the last mentioned individual, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce peeped from behind the screen. “A set of as honest-looking men as I wish to see!” uttered he with a frank cordiality that was scarcely reflected in the anxious countenances about him. “No sly-boots among them; how about the janitor, Hopgood?”</p>
			<p>“He shall be summoned at once, if you desire it,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester, “I have only delayed calling him that I might have leisure to interrogate him with reference to his duties, and this very theft. That is if you judge it advisable in me to tamper with the subject unassisted?”</p>
			<p>“Your nephew can help you if necessary,” replied the imperturbable detective. “I should like to hear what the man, Hopgood, has to say for himself,” and he glided back into his old position.</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester had scarcely reached out his hand to ring the bell by which he usually summoned the janitor, when the agent of Hicks, Saltzer &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr> came in. It was an interruption that demanded instant attention. Saluting the gentleman with his usual proud reserve, he drew his attention to the box lying upon the table.</p>
			<p>“This is yours, I believe, sir,” said he. “It was found in our vaults this morning in the condition in which you now behold it, and we are anxious to know if its contents are all correct.”</p>
			<p>“They have been handled,” returned the agent, after a careful survey of the various papers that filled the box, “but nothing appears to be missing.”</p>
			<p>Three persons at least in that room breathed more easily.</p>
			<p>“But the truth is,” the gentleman continued, with a half smile towards the silent President of the bank, “there was nothing in this box that would have been of much use to any other parties than ourselves. If there had been a bond or so here, I doubt if we should have come off so fortunately, eh? The lock has evidently been wrenched open, and that is certainly a pretty sure sign that something is not right hereabouts.”</p>
			<p>“Something is decidedly wrong,” came from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester sternly; “but through whose fault we do not as yet know.” And with a few words expressive of his relief at finding the other had sustained no material loss, he allowed the agent to depart.</p>
			<p>He had no sooner left the room than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant rose. “Are you going to question Hopgood now?” queried he, nervously pocketing his notebook.</p>
			<p>“Yes sir, if you have no objections.”</p>
			<p>The director fidgeted with his chair and finally moved towards the door.</p>
			<p>“I think you will get along better with him alone,” said he. “He is a man who very easily gets embarrassed, and has a way of acting as if he were afraid of me. I will just step outside while you talk to him.”</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester with a sudden dark flush on his brow, hastily stopped him. “I beg you will not,” said he, with a quick realization of what Hopgood might be led to say in the forthcoming interview, if he were not restrained by the presence of the director. “Hopgood is not so afraid of you that he will not answer every question that is put to him with straightforward frankness.” And he pushed up a chair, with a smile that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant evidently found himself unable to resist. The screen trembled slightly, but none of them noticed it; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester at once rang for Hopgood.</p>
			<p>He came in panting with his hurried descent from the fifth story, his face flushed and his eyes rolling, but without any of the secret perturbation Bertram had observed in them on a former occasion. “He cannot help us,” was the thought that darkened the young man’s brow as his eyes left the janitor, and faltering towards his uncle, fell upon the table before him.</p>
			<p>Everything was reflected in the mirror.</p>
			<p>“Well, Hopgood, I have a few questions to put to you this morning,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester in a restrained, but not unkindly tone.</p>
			<p>The worthy man bowed, bestowed a salutatory roll of his eyes on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant, and stood deferentially waiting.</p>
			<p>“No, he cannot help us,” was again Bertram’s thought, and again his eyes faltered to his uncle’s face, and again fell anxiously before him.</p>
			<p>“It has not been my habit to trouble you with inquiries about your management of matters under your charge,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester, stopping till the janitor’s wandering eyes settled upon his own. “Your conduct has always been exemplary, and your attention to duty satisfactory; but I would like to ask you today if you have observed anything amiss with the vaults of late? anything wrong about the boxes kept there? anything in short, that excited your suspicion or caused you to ask yourself if everything was as it should be?”</p>
			<p>The janitor’s ruddy face grew pale, and his eye fell with startled inquiry on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s box that still occupied the centre of the table. “No, sir,” he emphatically replied, “has anything⁠—”</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester did not wait to be questioned. “You have attended to your duties as promptly and conscientiously as usual; you have allowed no one to go to the vaults day or night, who had no business there? You have not relaxed your accustomed vigilance, or left the bank alone at any time during the hours it is under your charge?”</p>
			<p>“No sir, not for a minute, sir; that is⁠—” He stopped and his eye wandered towards <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant. “Never for a minute, sir,” he went on, “without I knew someone was in the bank, who was capable of looking after it.”</p>
			<p>“The watchman has been at his post every night up to the usual hour?”</p>
			<p>“Yes sir.”</p>
			<p>“There has been no carelessness in closing the vault doors after the departure of the clerks?”</p>
			<p>“No sir.”</p>
			<p>“And no trouble,” he continued, with a shade more of dignity, possibly because Hopgood’s telltale face was beginning to show signs of anxious confusion, “and no trouble in opening them at the proper time each morning?”</p>
			<p>“No sir.”</p>
			<p>“One question more⁠—”</p>
			<p>But here Bertram was called out, and in the momentary stir occasioned by his departure, Hopgood allowed himself to glance at the box before him more intently than he had hitherto presumed to do. He saw it was unlocked, and his hands began to tremble. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester’s voice recalled him to himself.</p>
			<p>“You are a faithful man,” said that gentleman, continuing his speech of a minute before, “and as such we are ready to acknowledge you; but the most conscientious amongst us are sometimes led into indiscretions. Now have you ever through carelessness or by means of any inadvertence, revealed to anyone in or out of the bank, the particular combination by which the lock of the vault-door is at present opened?”</p>
			<p>“No sir, indeed no; I am much too anxious, and feel my own responsibility entirely too much, not to preserve so important a secret with the utmost care and jealousy.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester’s voice, careful as he was to modulate it, showed a secret discouragement. “The vaults then as far as you know, are safe when once they are closed for the night?”</p>
			<p>“Yes sir.” The janitor’s face expressed a slight degree of wonder, but his voice was emphatic.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester’s eye travelled in the direction of the screen. “Very well,” said he; and paused to reflect.</p>
			<p>In the interim the door opened for a second time. “A gentleman to see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant,” said a voice.</p>
			<p>With an air of relief the director hastily rose, and before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester had realized his position, left the room and closed the door behind him. A knell seemed to ring its note in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester’s breast. The janitor, released as he supposed from all constraint, stepped hastily forward.</p>
			<p>“That box has been found unlocked,” he cried with a wave of his hand towards the table; “someone has been to the vaults, and I⁠—Oh, sir,” he hurriedly exclaimed, disregarding in his agitation the stern and forbidding look which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester in his secret despair had made haste to assume, “you did not want me to say anything about the time you came down so early in the morning, and I went out and left you alone in the bank, and you went to the vaults and opened <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant’s box by mistake, with a toothpick as you remember?”</p>
			<p>The mirror that looked down upon that pair, showed one very white face at that moment, but the screen that had trembled a moment before, stood strangely still in the silence.</p>
			<p>“No,” came at length from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester, with a composure that astonished himself. “I was not questioning you about matters of a year agone. But you might have told that incident if you pleased; it was very easily explainable.”</p>
			<p>“Yes sir, I know, and I beg pardon for alluding to it, but I was so taken aback, sir, by your questions; I wanted to tell the exact truth, and I did not want to say anything that would hurt you with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant; that is if I could help it. I hope I did right, sir,” he blundered on, conscious he was uttering words he might better have kept to himself, but too embarrassed to know how to emerge from the difficulty into which his mingled zeal and anxiety had betrayed him. “I was never a good hand at answering questions, and if anything really serious has happened, I shall wish you had taken me at my word and dismissed me immediately after that affair. Constantia Maria would have been a little worse off perhaps, but I should not be on hand to answer questions, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hopgood!”</p>
			<p>The man started, eyed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester’s white but powerfully controlled countenance, seemed struck with something he saw there, and was silent.</p>
			<p>“You make too much now, as you made too much then of a matter that having its sole ground in a mistake, is, as I say, easily explainable. This affair which has come up now, is not so clear. Three of the boxes have been opened, and from one certain valuables have been taken. Can you give me any information that will assist us in our search after the culprit?”</p>
			<p>“No sir.” The tone was quite humble, Hopgood drew back unconsciously towards the door.</p>
			<p>“As for the mistake of a year ago to which you have seen proper to allude, I shall myself take pains to inform <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant of it, since it has made such an impression upon you that it trammels your honesty and makes you consider it at all necessary to be anxious about it at this time.”</p>
			<p>And Hopgood unused to sarcasm from those lips, drew himself together, and with one more agitated look at the box on the table, sidled awkwardly from the room. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester at once advanced to the screen which he hastily pushed aside. “Well, sir,” said he, meeting the detective’s wavering eye and forcing him to return his look, “you have now seen the various employees of the bank and heard most of them converse. Is there anything more you would like to inquire into before giving us the opinion I requested?”</p>
			<p>“No sir,” said the detective, coming forward, but very slowly and somewhat hesitatingly for him. “I think I am ready to say⁠—”</p>
			<p>Here the door opened, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant returned. The detective drew a breath of relief and repeated his words with a businesslike assurance. “I think I am ready to say, that from the nature of the theft and the mysterious manner in which it has been perpetrated, suspicion undoubtedly points to someone connected with the bank. That is all that you require of me today?” he added, with a bow of some formality in the direction of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” was the short reply. But in an instant a change passed over the stately form of the speaker. Advancing to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce, he confronted him with a countenance almost majestic in its severity, and somewhat severely remarked, “This is a serious charge to bring against men whose countenances you yourself have denominated as honest. Are we to believe you have fully considered the question, and realize the importance of what you say?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester,” replied the detective, with great self-possession and some dignity, “a man who is brought every day of his life into positions where the least turning of a hair will sink a man or save him, learns to weigh his words, before he speaks even in such informal inquiries as these.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester bowed and turned towards <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant. “Is there any further action you would like to have taken in regard to this matter today?” he asked, without a tremble in his voice.</p>
			<p>With a glance at the half open box of the absent <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harrington, the agitated director slowly shook his head. “We must have time to think,” said he.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gryce at once took up his hat. “If the charge implied in my opinion strikes you, gentlemen, as serious, you must at least acknowledge that your own judgment does not greatly differ from mine, or why such unnecessary agitation in regard to a loss so petty, by a gentleman worth as we are told his millions.” And with this passing shot, to which neither of his auditors responded, he made his final obeisance and calmly left the room.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant slowly confronted one another.</p>
			<p>“The man speaks the truth,” said the former. “You at least suspect someone in the bank, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant?”</p>
			<p>“I have no wish to,” hastily returned the other, “but facts⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Would facts of this nature have any weight with you against the unspotted character of a man never known by you to meditate, much less commit a dishonest action?”</p>
			<p>“No; yet facts are facts, and if it is proved that someone in our employ has perpetrated a theft, the mind will unconsciously ask who, and remain uneasy till it is satisfied.”</p>
			<p>“And if it never is?”</p>
			<p>“It will always ask who, I suppose.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester drew back. “The matter shall be pushed,” said he; “you shall be satisfied. Surveillance over each man employed in this institution ought sooner or later to elicit the truth. The police shall take it in charge.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant looked uneasy. “I suppose it is only justice,” murmured he, “but it is a scandal I would have been glad to avoid.”</p>
			<p>“And I, but circumstances admit of no other course. The innocent must not suffer for the guilty, even so far as an unfounded suspicion would lead.”</p>
			<p>“No, no, of course not.” And the director bustled about after his overcoat and hat.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester watched him with growing sadness. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stuyvesant,” said he, as the latter stood before him ready for the street, “we have always been on terms of friendship, and nothing but the most pleasant relations have ever existed between us. Will you pardon me if I ask you to give me your hand in good day?”</p>
			<p>The director paused, looked a trifle astonished, but held out his hand not only with cordiality but very evident affection.</p>
			<p>“Good day,” cried he, “good day.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sylvester pressed that hand, and then with a dignified bow, allowed the director to depart. It was his last effort at composure. When the door closed, his head sank on his hands, and life with all its hopes and honors, love and happiness, seemed to die within him.</p>
			<p>He was interrupted at length by Bertram. “Well, uncle?” asked the young man with unrestrained emotion.</p>
			<p>“The theft has been committed by someone in this bank; so the detective gives out, and so we are called upon to believe. <em>Who</em> the man is who has caused us all this misery, neither he, nor you, nor I, nor anyone, is likely to very soon determine. Meantime⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Well?” cried Bertram anxiously, after a moment of suspense.</p>
			<p>“Meantime, courage!” his uncle resumed with forced cheerfulness.</p>
			<p>But as he was leaving the bank he came up to Bertram, and laying his hand on his shoulder, quietly said:</p>
			<p>“I want you to go immediately to my house upon leaving here. I may not be back till midnight, and Miss Fairchild may need the comfort of your presence. Will you do it, Bertram?”</p>
			<p>“Uncle! I⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hush! you will comfort me best by doing what I ask. May I rely upon you?”</p>
			<p>“Always.”</p>
			<p>“That is enough.”</p>
			<p>And with just a final look, the two gentlemen parted, and the shadow which had rested all day upon the bank, deepened over Bertram’s head like a pall.</p>
			<p>It was not lifted by the sight of Hopgood stealing a few minutes later towards the door by which his uncle had departed, his face pale, and his eyes fixed in a stare, that bespoke some deep and moving determination.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
